SCOTLAND
Scotland (Scots: Scotland, Scottish Gaelic: Alba [ˈal̪ˠapə]) is a country that 
is part of the United Kingdom. Covering the northern third of the island of 
Great Britain, mainland Scotland has a 96-mile (154 km) border with England to 
the southeast and is otherwise surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the north 
and west, the North Sea to the northeast and the Irish Sea to the south. The 
country also contains more than 790 islands, principally in the archipelagos of 
the Hebrides and the Northern Isles. Most of the population, including the 
capital Edinburgh, is concentrated in the Central Belt – the plain between the 
Scottish Highlands and the Southern Uplands – in the Scottish Lowlands.

Scotland is divided into 32 administrative subdivisions or local authorities, 
known as council areas. Glasgow City is the largest council area in terms of 
population, with Highland being the largest in terms of area. Limited 
self-governing power, covering matters such as education, social services and 
roads and transportation, is devolved from the Scottish Government to each 
subdivision. Scotland is the second largest country in the United Kingdom, and 
accounted for 8.3% of the population in 2012.

The Kingdom of Scotland emerged as an independent sovereign state in the Early 
Middle Ages and continued to exist until 1707. By inheritance in 1603, James VI 
of Scotland became king of England and Ireland, thus forming a personal union 
of the three kingdoms. Scotland subsequently entered into a political union 
with the Kingdom of England on 1 May 1707 to create the new Kingdom of Great 
Britain. The union also created the Parliament of Great Britain, which 
succeeded both the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England. In 
1801, the Kingdom of Great Britain entered into a political union with the 
Kingdom of Ireland to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 
(in 1922, the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the 
latter being officially renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland in 1927).

Within Scotland, the monarchy of the United Kingdom has continued to use a 
variety of styles, titles and other royal symbols of statehood specific to the 
pre-union Kingdom of Scotland. The legal system within Scotland has also 
remained separate from those of England and Wales and Northern Ireland; 
Scotland constitutes a distinct jurisdiction in both public and private law. 
The continued existence of legal, educational, religious and other institutions 
distinct from those in the remainder of the UK have all contributed to the 
continuation of Scottish culture and national identity since the 1707 
incorporating union with England.

In 1999, a Scottish Parliament was re-established, in the form of a devolved 
unicameral legislature comprising 129 members, having authority over many areas 
of domestic policy. The head of the Scottish Government is the first minister 
of Scotland, who is supported by the deputy first minister of Scotland. 
Scotland is represented in the United Kingdom Parliament by 59 MPs. Scotland is 
also a member of the British–Irish Council, sending five members of the 
Scottish Parliament to the British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly. as well as 
being part of the Joint Ministerial Committee, represented by the First 
Minister.

History
Early history

The first written reference to Scotland was in 320 BC by Greek sailor Pytheas, 
who called the northern tip of Britain "Orcas", the source of the name of the 
Orkney islands. During the first millennium BC, the society changed 
dramatically to a chiefdom model, as consolidation of settlement led to the 
concentration of wealth and underground stores of surplus food.

The Roman conquest of Britain was never completed, and most of modern Scotland 
was not brought under Roman political control. The first Roman incursion into 
Scotland occurred in 79 AD, when Agricola invaded Scotland; he defeated a 
Caledonian army at the Battle of Mons Graupius in 83 AD. After the Roman 
victory, Roman forts were briefly set along the Gask Ridge close to the 
Highland line, but by three years after the battle, the Roman armies had 
withdrawn to the Southern Uplands. Remains of Roman forts established in the 
1st century have been found as far north as the Moray Firth. By the reign of 
the Roman emperor Trajan (r. 98–117), Roman control had lapsed to Britain south 
of a line between the River Tyne and the Solway Firth. Along this line Trajan's 
successor Hadrian (r. 117–138) erected Hadrian's Wall in northern England and 
the Limes Britannicus became the northern border of the Roman Empire. The Roman 
influence on the southern part of the country was considerable, and they 
introduced Christianity to Scotland.

The Antonine Wall was built from 142 at the order of Hadrian's successor 
Antoninus Pius (r. 138–161), defending the Roman part of Scotland from the 
unadministered part of the island, north of a line between the Firth of Clyde 
and the Firth of Forth. The successful Roman invasion of Caledonia 208–210 was 
undertaken by emperors of the imperial Severan dynasty in response to the 
breaking of treaty by the Caledonians in 197, but permanent conquest of the 
whole of Great Britain was forestalled by the death of the senior emperor 
Septimius Severus (r. 193–211) while on campaign at Eboracum (York), and the 
Caledonians were again in revolt in 210–211. Forts erected by Roman army of the 
Severan campaign were placed near those established by Agricola and were 
clustered at the mouths of the glens in the Highlands.

To the Roman historians Tacitus and Cassius Dio, the Scottish Highlands and the 
area north of the River Forth was called Caledonia. According to Cassius Dio, 
the inhabitants of Caledonia were the Caledonians and the Maeatae. Other 
ancient authors used the adjective "Caledonian" to pertain to anywhere in 
northern or inland Britain, often mentioning the region's people and animals, 
its cold climate, its pearls, and a noteworthy region of wooden hills 
(Latin: saltus) which the 2nd-century AD Roman philosopher Ptolemy, in his 
Geography, described as being south-west of the Beauly Firth. The name 
Caledonia is echoed in the place names of Dunkeld, Rohallion, and Schiehallion.

The Great Conspiracy against Roman rule in Britain in the later 4th century, 
in which the Scoti participated, was defeated by the comes Theodosius. The 
formation of a new province, called Valentia after the reigning emperor Valens 
(r. 364–378), which may have been in Scotland, resulted. Roman military 
government was withdrawn from the island altogether by the early 5th century, 
resulting in the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain and the immigration of the 
Saxons to southern Scotland and the rest of eastern Great Britain.

Middle Ages

Beginning in the sixth century, the area that is now Scotland was divided into 
three areas: Pictland, a patchwork of small lordships in central Scotland; the 
Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Northumbria, which had conquered southeastern Scotland; 
and Dál Riata, founded by settlers from Ireland, bringing Gaelic language and 
culture with them. These societies were based on the family unit and had sharp 
divisions in wealth, although the vast majority were poor and worked full-time 
in subsistence agriculture. The Picts kept slaves (mostly captured in war) 
through the ninth century.

Gaelic influence over Pictland and Northumbria was facilitated by the large 
number of Gaelic-speaking clerics working as missionaries. Operating in the 
sixth century on the island of Iona, Saint Columba was one of the earliest and 
best-known missionaries. The Vikings began to raid Scotland in the eighth 
century. Although the raiders sought slaves and luxury items, their main 
motivation was to acquire land. The oldest Norse settlements were in northwest 
Scotland, but they eventually conquered many areas along the coast. Old Norse 
entirely displaced Gaelic in the Northern Isles.

In the ninth century, the Norse threat allowed a Gael named Cináed mac Ailpín 
(Kenneth I) to seize power over Pictland, establishing a royal dynasty to which 
the modern monarchs trace their lineage, and marking the beginning of the end 
of Pictish culture. The kingdom of Cináed and his descendants, called Alba, was 
Gaelic in character but existed on the same area as Pictland. By the end of the 
tenth century, the Pictish language went extinct as its speakers shifted to 
Gaelic. From a base in eastern Scotland north of the River Forth and south of 
the River Spey, the kingdom expanded first southwards, into the former 
Northumbrian lands, and northwards into Moray. Around the turn of the 
millennium, there was a centralization in agricultural lands and the first 
towns began to be established.

In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, with much of Scotland under the 
control of a single ruler and united by the Gaelic language, a modern 
nation-state first emerged, as did Scottish national consciousness. The 
domination of Gaelic was diminished during the reign of David I (1124–53), 
during which many English-speaking colonists settled in Scotland. David I and 
his successors centralized royal power and united mainland Scotland, capturing 
regions such as Moray, Galloway, and Caithness, although he did not succeed at 
extending his power over the Hebrides, which had been ruled by various Scottish 
clans following the death of Somerled in 1164. The system of feudalism was 
consolidated, with both Anglo-Norman incomers and native Gaelic chieftains 
being granted land in exchange for serving the king. The Scottish kings 
rejected English demands to subjugate themselves; in fact, England invaded 
Scotland several times to prevent Scotland's expansion into northern England.


The death of Alexander III in March 1286 broke the succession line of 
Scotland's kings. Edward I of England arbitrated between various claimants for 
the Scottish crown. In return for surrendering Scotland's nominal independence, 
John Balliol was pronounced king in 1292. In 1294, Balliol and other Scottish 
lords refused Edward's demands to serve in his army against the French. 
Scotland and France sealed a treaty on 23 October 1295, known as the Auld 
Alliance. War ensued, and John was deposed by Edward who took personal control 
of Scotland. Andrew Moray and William Wallace initially emerged as the 
principal leaders of the resistance to English rule in the Wars of Scottish 
Independence, until Robert the Bruce was crowned king of Scotland in 1306. 
Victory at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 proved the Scots had regained 
control of their kingdom. In 1320 the world's first documented declaration of 
independence, the Declaration of Arbroath, won the support of Pope John XXII, 
leading to the legal recognition of Scottish sovereignty by the English Crown.

A civil war between the Bruce dynasty and their long-term rivals of the House 
of Comyn and House of Balliol lasted until the middle of the 14th century. 
Although the Bruce faction was successful, David II's lack of an heir allowed 
his half-nephew Robert II, the Lord High Steward of Scotland, to come to the 
throne and establish the House of Stewart. The Stewarts ruled Scotland for the 
remainder of the Middle Ages. The country they ruled experienced greater 
prosperity from the end of the 14th century through the Scottish Renaissance to 
the Reformation, despite the effects of the Black Death in 1349 and increasing 
division between Highlands and Lowlands. Multiple truces reduced warfare on the 
southern border.

Early modern period
16th century

The Treaty of Perpetual Peace was signed in 1502 by James IV of Scotland and 
Henry VII of England. James married Henry's daughter, Margaret Tudor. James 
invaded England in support of France under the terms of the Auld Alliance and 
became the last British monarch to die in battle, at Flodden in 1513. In 1560, 
the Treaty of Edinburgh brought an end to the Anglo-French conflict and 
recognized the Protestant Elizabeth I as Queen of England. The Parliament of 
Scotland met and immediately adopted the Scots Confession, which signalled the 
Scottish Reformation's sharp break from papal authority and Roman Catholic 
teaching. The Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots was forced to abdicate in 1567.

17th century
In 1603, James VI, King of Scots inherited the thrones of the Kingdom of 
England and the Kingdom of Ireland in the Union of the Crowns, and moved to 
London. The first Union Jack was designed at James's behest, to be flown in 
addition to the St Andrew's Cross on Scots vessels at sea. James VI and I 
intended to create a single kingdom of Great Britain, but was thwarted in 
his attempt to do so by the Parliament of England, which supported the wrecking 
proposal that a full legal union be sought instead, a proposal to which the 
Scots Parliament would not assent, causing the king to withdraw the plan.

With the exception of a short period under the Protectorate, Scotland remained 
a separate state in the 17th century, but there was considerable conflict 
between the crown and the Covenanters over the form of church government. The 
military was strengthened, allowing the imposition of royal authority on the 
western Highland clans. The 1609 Statutes of Iona compelled the cultural 
integration of Hebridean clan leaders. In 1641 and again in 1643 the Parliament 
of Scotland unsuccessfully sought a union with England which was "federative" 
and not "incorporating", in which Scotland would retain a separate parliament. 
The issue of union split the parliament in 1648.

After the execution of the Scottish king at Whitehall in 1649, amid the Wars of 
the Three Kingdoms and its events in Scotland, Oliver Cromwell, the victorious 
Lord Protector, imposed the British Isles' first written constitution – the 
Instrument of Government – on Scotland in 1652 as part of the republican 
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The Protectorate Parliament was 
the first Westminster parliament to include representatives nominally from 
Scotland. The monarchy of the House of Stuart was resumed with the Restoration 
in Scotland in 1660.

The Parliament of Scotland sought a commercial union with England in 1664; the 
proposal was rejected in 1668. In 1670 the Parliament of England rejected a 
proposed political union with Scotland. English proposals along the same lines 
were abandoned in 1674 and in 1685. The Battle of Altimarlach in 1680 was the
 last significant clan battle fought between highland clans. After the fall and 
 flight into exile of the Catholic Stuart king, James VII and II the Glorious 
 Revolution in Scotland and the Convention of Estates replaced the House of 
 Stuart in favour of William III and Mary II. The Scots Parliament rejected 
 proposals for a political union in 1689. Jacobitism, the political support for 
 the exiled Catholic Stuart dynasty, remained a threat to the security of the 
 British state under the House of Orange and the succeeding House of Hanover 
 until the defeat of the Jacobite rising of 1745.

In common with countries such as France, Norway, Sweden and Finland, Scotland 
experienced famines during the 1690s. Mortality, reduced childbirths and 
increased emigration reduced the population of parts of the country about 
10–15%. In 1698, the Company of Scotland attempted a project to secure a 
trading colony on the Isthmus of Panama. Almost every Scottish landowner who 
had money to spare is said to have invested in the Darien scheme.

After another proposal from the English House of Lords was rejected in 1695, 
and a further Lords motion was voted down in the House of Commons in 1700, the 
Parliament of Scotland again rejected union in 1702. The failure of the Darien 
Scheme bankrupted the landowners who had invested, though not the burghs. 
Nevertheless, the nobles' bankruptcy, along with the threat of an English 
invasion, played a leading role in convincing the Scots elite to back a union 
with England. On 22 July 1706, the Treaty of Union was agreed between 
representatives of the Scots Parliament and the Parliament of England. 
The following year, twin Acts of Union were passed by both parliaments to 
create the united Kingdom of Great Britain with effect from 1 May 1707 with 
popular opposition and anti-union riots in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and elsewhere. 
The newly formed Parliament of Great Britain rejected proposals from the 
Parliament of Ireland that the third kingdom be incorporated in the union.

18th century

With trade tariffs with England abolished, trade blossomed, especially with 
Colonial America. The clippers belonging to the Glasgow Tobacco Lords were the 
fastest ships on the route to Virginia. Until the American War of Independence 
in 1776, Glasgow was the world's premier tobacco port, dominating world trade. 
The disparity between the wealth of the merchant classes of the Scottish 
Lowlands and the ancient clans of the Scottish Highlands grew, amplifying 
centuries of division.

The deposed Jacobite Stuart claimants had remained popular in the Highlands and 
north-east, particularly amongst non-Presbyterians, including Roman Catholics 
and Episcopalian Protestants. However, two major Jacobite risings launched in 
1715 and 1745 failed to remove the House of Hanover from the British throne. 
The threat of the Jacobite movement to the United Kingdom and its monarchs 
effectively ended at the Battle of Culloden, Great Britain's last pitched 
battle.

The Scottish Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution turned Scotland into 
an intellectual, commercial and industrial powerhouse – so much so Voltaire 
said "We look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilisation." With the demise 
of Jacobitism and the advent of the Union, thousands of Scots, mainly 
Lowlanders, took up numerous positions of power in politics, civil service, 
the army and navy, trade, economics, colonial enterprises and other areas 
across the nascent British Empire. Historian Neil Davidson notes "after 1746 
there was an entirely new level of participation by Scots in political life, 
particularly outside Scotland." Davidson also states "far from being 
'peripheral' to the British economy, Scotland – or more precisely, the Lowlands 
– lay at its core."

In the Highlands, clan chiefs gradually started to think of themselves more as 
commercial landlords than leaders of their people. These social and economic 
changes included the first phase of the Highland Clearances and, ultimately, 
the demise of clanship.

19th century

The Scottish Reform Act 1832 increased the number of Scottish MPs and widened 
the franchise to include more of the middle classes. From the mid-century, 
there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and the post of 
Secretary of State for Scotland was revived. Towards the end of the century 
Prime Ministers of Scottish descent included William Gladstone, and the Earl of 
Rosebery. In the late 19th century the growing importance of the working 
classes was marked by Keir Hardie's success in the Mid Lanarkshire by-election, 
1888, leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party, which was 
absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895, with Hardie as its first 
leader.

Glasgow became one of the largest cities in the world and known as "the Second 
City of the Empire" after London. After 1860 the Clydeside shipyards 
specialised in steamships made of iron (after 1870, made of steel), which 
rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the 
battle fleets of the world. It became the world's pre-eminent shipbuilding 
centre. The industrial developments, while they brought work and wealth, were 
so rapid that housing, town-planning, and provision for public health did not 
keep pace with them, and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and 
cities were notoriously bad, with overcrowding, high infant mortality, and 
growing rates of tuberculosis.

While the Scottish Enlightenment is traditionally considered to have concluded 
toward the end of the 18th century, disproportionately large Scottish 
contributions to British science and letters continued for another 50 years or 
more, thanks to such figures as the physicists James Clerk Maxwell and Lord 
Kelvin, and the engineers and inventors James Watt and William Murdoch, whose 
work was critical to the technological developments of the Industrial 
Revolution throughout Britain. In literature, the most successful figure of the 
mid-19th century was Walter Scott. His first prose work, Waverley in 1814, is 
often called the first historical novel. It launched a highly successful career 
that probably more than any other helped define and popularise Scottish 
cultural identity. In the late 19th century, a number of Scottish-born authors 
achieved international reputations, such as Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur 
Conan Doyle, J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald. Scotland also played a major 
part in the development of art and architecture. The Glasgow School, which 
developed in the late 19th century, and flourished in the early 20th century, 
produced a distinctive blend of influences including the Celtic Revival the 
Arts and Crafts movement, and Japonism, which found favour throughout the 
modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style. 
Proponents included architect and artist Charles Rennie Mackintosh.

This period saw a process of rehabilitation for Highland culture. In the 1820s, 
as part of the Romantic revival, tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of 
the social elite, not just in Scotland, but across Europe, prompted by the 
popularity of Macpherson's Ossian cycle and then Walter Scott's Waverley 
novels. However, the Highlands remained poor, the only part of mainland Britain 
to continue to experience recurrent famine, with a limited range of products 
exported out of the region, negligible industrial production, but a continued 
population growth that tested the subsistence agriculture. These problems, and 
the desire to improve agriculture and profits were the driving forces of the 
ongoing Highland Clearances, in which many of the population of the Highlands 
suffered eviction as lands were enclosed, principally so that they could be 
used for sheep farming. The first phase of the clearances followed patterns of 
agricultural change throughout Britain. The second phase was driven by 
overpopulation, the Highland Potato Famine and the collapse of industries that 
had relied on the wartime economy of the Napoleonic Wars. The population of 
Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 
1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901. Even with the development of 
industry, there were not enough good jobs. As a result, during the period 
1841–1931, about 2 million Scots migrated to North America and Australia, and 
another 750,000 Scots relocated to England.


After prolonged years of struggle in the Kirk, in 1834 the Evangelicals gained 
control of the General Assembly and passed the Veto Act, which allowed 
congregations to reject unwanted "intrusive" presentations to livings by 
patrons. The following "Ten Years' Conflict" of legal and political wrangling 
ended in defeat for the non-intrusionists in the civil courts. The result was a 
schism from the church by some of the non-intrusionists led by Dr Thomas 
Chalmers, known as the Great Disruption of 1843. Roughly a third of the clergy, 
mainly from the North and Highlands, formed the separate Free Church of 
Scotland. In the late 19th century growing divisions between fundamentalist 
Calvinists and theological liberals resulted in a further split in the Free 
Church as the rigid Calvinists broke away to form the Free Presbyterian Church 
in 1893. Catholic emancipation in 1829 and the influx of large numbers of Irish 
immigrants, particularly after the famine years of the late 1840s, mainly to 
the growing lowland centres like Glasgow, led to a transformation in the 
fortunes of Catholicism. In 1878, despite opposition, a Roman Catholic 
ecclesiastical hierarchy was restored to the country, and Catholicism became a 
significant denomination within Scotland.

Industrialisation, urbanisation and the Disruption of 1843 all undermined the 
tradition of parish schools. From 1830 the state began to fund buildings with 
grants; then from 1846 it was funding schools by direct sponsorship; and in 
1872 Scotland moved to a system like that in England of state-sponsored largely 
free schools, run by local school boards. The historic University of Glasgow 
became a leader in British higher education by providing the educational needs 
of youth from the urban and commercial classes, as opposed to the upper class. 
The University of St Andrews pioneered the admission of women to Scottish 
universities. From 1892 Scottish universities could admit and graduate women 
and the numbers of women at Scottish universities steadily increased until the 
early 20th century.


Caused by the advent of refrigeration and imports of lamb, mutton and wool from 
overseas, the 1870s brought with them a collapse of sheep prices and an abrupt 
halt in the previous sheep farming boom. Land prices subsequently plummeted, 
too, and accelerated the process of the so-called "Balmoralisation" of 
Scotland, an era in the second half of the 19th century that saw an increase in 
tourism and the establishment of large estates dedicated to field sports like 
deer stalking and grouse shooting, especially in the Scottish Highlands. The 
process was named after Balmoral estate, purchased by Queen Victoria in 1848, 
that fuelled the romanticisation of upland Scotland and initiated an influx of 
the newly wealthy acquiring similar estates in the following decades. In the 
late 19th century just 118 people owned half of Scotland, with nearly 60 per 
cent of the whole country being part of shooting estates. While their relative 
importance has somewhat declined due to changing recreational interests 
throughout the 20th century, deer stalking and grouse shooting remain of prime 
importance on many private estates in Scotland.

20th century

Scotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War. 
It especially provided manpower, ships, machinery, fish and money. With a 
population of 4.8 million in 1911, Scotland sent over half a million men to the 
war, of whom over a quarter died in combat or from disease, and 150,000 were 
seriously wounded. Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig was Britain's commander on 
the Western Front.

The war saw the emergence of a radical movement called "Red Clydeside" led by 
militant trades unionists. Formerly a Liberal stronghold, the industrial 
districts switched to Labour by 1922, with a base among the Irish Catholic 
working-class districts. Women were especially active in building neighbourhood 
solidarity on housing issues. However, the "Reds" operated within the Labour 
Party and had little influence in Parliament and the mood changed to passive 
despair by the late 1920s.

The shipbuilding industry expanded by a third and expected renewed prosperity, 
but instead, a serious depression hit the economy by 1922 and it did not fully 
recover until 1939. The interwar years were marked by economic stagnation in 
rural and urban areas, and high unemployment. Indeed, the war brought with it 
deep social, cultural, economic, and political dislocations. Thoughtful Scots 
pondered their declension, as the main social indicators such as poor health, 
bad housing, and long-term mass unemployment, pointed to terminal social and 
economic stagnation at best, or even a downward spiral. Service abroad on 
behalf of the Empire lost its allure to ambitious young people, who left 
Scotland permanently. The heavy dependence on obsolescent heavy industry and 
mining was a central problem, and no one offered workable solutions. The 
despair reflected what Finlay (1994) describes as a widespread sense of 
hopelessness that prepared local business and political leaders to accept a new 
orthodoxy of centralised government economic planning when it arrived during 
the Second World War.

During the Second World War, Scotland was targeted by Nazi Germany largely due 
to its factories, shipyards, and coal mines. Cities such as Glasgow and 
Edinburgh were targeted by German bombers, as were smaller towns mostly located 
in the central belt of the country. Perhaps the most significant air-raid in 
Scotland was the Clydebank Blitz of March 1941, which intended to destroy naval 
shipbuilding in the area. 528 people were killed and 4,000 homes totally 
destroyed.


Perhaps Scotland's most unusual wartime episode occurred in 1941 when Rudolf 
Hess flew to Renfrewshire, possibly intending to broker a peace deal through 
the Duke of Hamilton. Before his departure from Germany, Hess had given his 
adjutant, Karlheinz Pintsch, a letter addressed to Hitler that detailed his 
intentions to open peace negotiations with the British. Pintsch delivered the 
letter to Hitler at the Berghof around noon on 11 May. Albert Speer later said 
Hitler described Hess's departure as one of the worst personal blows of his 
life, as he considered it a personal betrayal. Hitler worried that his allies, 
Italy and Japan, would perceive Hess's act as an attempt by Hitler to secretly 
open peace negotiations with the British.


As in World War I, Scapa Flow in Orkney served as an important Royal Navy base. 
Attacks on Scapa Flow and Rosyth gave RAF fighters their first successes 
downing bombers in the Firth of Forth and East Lothian. The shipyards and heavy 
engineering factories in Glasgow and Clydeside played a key part in the war 
effort, and suffered attacks from the Luftwaffe, enduring great destruction and 
loss of life. As transatlantic voyages involved negotiating north-west Britain, 
Scotland played a key part in the battle of the North Atlantic. Shetland's 
relative proximity to occupied Norway resulted in the Shetland bus by which 
fishing boats helped Norwegians flee the Nazis, and expeditions across the 
North Sea to assist resistance.

Scottish industry came out of the depression slump by a dramatic expansion of 
its industrial activity, absorbing unemployed men and many women as well. The 
shipyards were the centre of more activity, but many smaller industries 
produced the machinery needed by the British bombers, tanks and warships. 
Agriculture prospered, as did all sectors except for coal mining, which was 
operating mines near exhaustion. Real wages, adjusted for inflation, rose 25% 
and unemployment temporarily vanished. Increased income, and the more equal 
distribution of food, obtained through a tight rationing system, dramatically 
improved the health and nutrition.


After 1945, Scotland's economic situation worsened due to overseas competition, 
inefficient industry, and industrial disputes. Only in recent decades has the 
country enjoyed something of a cultural and economic renaissance. Economic 
factors contributing to this recovery included a resurgent financial services 
industry, electronics manufacturing, (see Silicon Glen), and the North Sea oil 
and gas industry. The introduction in 1989 by Margaret Thatcher's government of 
the Community Charge (widely known as the Poll Tax) one year before the rest of 
Great Britain, contributed to a growing movement for Scottish control over 
domestic affairs. Following a referendum on devolution proposals in 1997, the 
Scotland Act 1998 was passed by the British Parliament, which established a 
devolved Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government with responsibility for 
most laws specific to Scotland. The Scottish Parliament was reconvened in 
Edinburgh on 4 July 1999. The first to hold the office of first minister of 
Scotland was Donald Dewar, who served until his sudden death in 2000.

21st century
The Scottish Parliament Building at Holyrood opened in October 2004 after 
lengthy construction delays and running over budget. The Scottish Parliament's 
form of proportional representation (the additional member system) resulted in 
no one party having an overall majority for the first three Scottish parliament 
elections. However, the pro-independence Scottish National Party led by Alex 
Salmond achieved an overall majority in the 2011 election, winning 69 of the 
129 seats available. The success of the SNP in achieving a majority in the 
Scottish Parliament paved the way for the September 2014 referendum on Scottish 
independence. The majority voted against the proposition, with 55% voting no to 
independence. More powers, particularly in relation to taxation, were devolved 
to the Scottish Parliament after the referendum, following cross-party talks in 
the Smith Commission.
